Dave continues.
Now that we are familiar with the
rpm-based package managers
let's check out the equivalent
on Debian distros
such as Ubuntu, PureOS, Linux Mint, et cetera.
Dave continues with the explanation.
Here, we will look into dpkg
and apt specifically.
dpkg stands for the Debian package
manager and similar to rpm,
it is a low-level package manager.
Similar to rpm, dpkg can be used
to install, remove, upgrade, list,
and verify a package.
The package extension is .deb.
To install or update an existing package,
use the dpkg-i command with
the package file name.
To uninstall, use the -r flag.
To list packages installed in the system
along with the version number
in a short description, use the -l flag.
Use the -s option to check the status of
the package if it is installed in the system.
Finally, use the -p flag to display
details about packages
such as version number, maintainer, et cetera.
Similar to rpm, dpkg does not
honor the dependencies
when it comes to package management.
We saw earlier that an install may fail
due to dependencies issues.
This is the reason why we use higher-level
Debian package managers
such as apt and apt-get.
of relying on dpkg, you can install software
along with its dependencies
using apt or apt-get.
Although it sounds similar, apt and apt-get
do not depend on each other.
apt stands for advanced package managers
is more user friendly and overall
a better tool compared to apt-get.
his is the reason why we will focus on apt
more than apt-get in the upcoming section.
apt acts as a front end package manager
that relies on the dpkg utility,
quite similar to the relation between
yum and rpm that we saw earlier.
Similar to yum, apt relies on a software
repository that contains packages
that would eventually
be installed on the system.
The software repository for apt
is defined in the /etc/apt/sources.list file.
The source can be a local one such as
a directory on the file system or a CD-ROM,
or it can be at a remote location
that is accessed via HTTP,
HTTPS, or FTP transfer protocols.
Let us now see some of the common apt commands.
Run the apt update command
to refresh the repository.
This command is used to download package
information from all available sources.
A good time to run this would be
immediately after installing the OS
or after adding new sources.
The apt upgrade command can be
used to install available upgrades
of all packages currently installed on
the system from the sources configured.
You can also update the repositories
using the apt edit sources command.
This opens up the /etc/apt/sources.list file
in the text editor of your choice
such as vim or nano.
Another way to add more repositories,
update the sources.list file
directly using a text editor
such as the VI-editor.
Once the repositories have been set up,
you can make use of it to run apt commands.
To install a package, run the
apt install command.
Run the apt remove command
to remove the package.
The apt search command can be used
to look for a package in the repository.
You can also list all the available packages
using the apt list command.